So we have seen that Git is a map where the keys are
hashes, and the values are pieces of content.
But I also said that Git is not just a map, it's a persistent map.
Where does persistent come from?
Let's go back to the git hash‑object command that we used a few minutes
ago. If I want the Apple Pie content to be persistent,
I can add the ‑w argument to this command. ‑w stands for write.
So now, besides generating the hash, Git will also save this
piece of content in its repository. However,
now we don't have a repository yet, so if I try this command straight away,
Git complaints. We're not in a Git project. We don't have a
repository. I don't know where to save the content.
So, let's turn this directory into a Git project.
There is a command for that, and you probably used it already.
It's a high‑level persistence command, git init. There. A brief aside here,
depending on your Git version and configuration, at this point,
you might get a message like this that says that I created an initial branch
called the master, and you can change that name, if you wish. These days, Git,
like other technologies, is revisiting its vocabulary to remove divisive
language. So, it displays this message in case you want to rename the branch
from master to something else.
And, in fact, I could rename it using this command that Git suggested.
I'll rename it to main.
I think that besides being more inclusive,
it's just a more accurate name for reasons that will be clear later
when we talk about branches. We'll get to that in the next module. And
now, our initial branch is called main.
So, we created a new repository, and Git is saying,
look,
the new empty repository is in this directory, .git. That's a
hidden directory. On this operating system, I can visualize
hidden directories with the ‑a switch.
So now Git has the .git directory, a place to save stuff.
And if you run the hash‑object command again with ‑w, we get
the hash, and we also save the content.
Let's see where exactly.
Let's peek inside the .git directory.
There are a few files and folders here, but for now, just
look at this directory here, objects.
This is called the object database.
It's the place where Git saves all these objects like
storing the Apple Pie we just saved.
Let's peek inside. Ignore this too, the info and pack
subdirectories, for now. We'll come to this later.
Instead, look at this subdirectory here.
Its name is 23, and these are the first two hexidecimal digits
of the hash of the content we just saved.
And if we look inside 23, there is a file in here, and the name of
this file is the remaining digits of the hash.
Git uses this scheme to organize content and spread it over multiple
directories. It's just a trick to avoid piling up all the content
into a single huge clutter directory.
Our original storing Apple Pie is inside this file.
This is what Git calls a blob of data.
A blob is a generic piece of content; however, the original
storing has been mangled a bit. Inside the file, Git added a
small header and compressed the content to save space, so we
cannot just open the file and read it.
But we can use another low‑level plumbing command to look at the content.
It's called git cat‑file.
Once again,
don't worry if you don't remember this command. It's rarely used. I'm using it
now just because I want to show you how Git saves content.
Git cat‑file takes the hash of an object and an argument.
If we run it with the ‑t argument,
it stands for type, Git tells us what this piece of content
is. It's a blob. And if we run it again with ‑p for pretty
printing, then Git unzips the object,
removes the header, and it prints out the actual content of the blob.
And here it is, the storing Apple Pie there.
So, so far we have seen that Git can take any piece of content,
generate the key for it, as shown hash, and then persists
the content into the repository as a blob.
A persistent map, this is the very basic of the Git model. Let's build on this and move on to the next layer of the onion.